---
word_count: 802
duration: 7m
---

# Eyes Are The Window To The Soul

This is an older story. It was from a time that I was still studying in university, so it is at least 10 years ago. I was doing a minor at the time called the educational minor. It is one semester in which you study to become a high school teacher. Part of this minor is a class that didn't have a specific topic, but it was more general about reflecting on your lessons and talking about situations that happened in the classroom. Part of this class was to give one of your prepared lessons so you could get feedback from your classmates. But there was a twist. The teacher would assign some classmates with some role to play in the practice lesson, like the annoying kid that keeps asking questions or a shy kid that would talk way too soft to be heard.

So one day, we would do a practice lesson and it was the turn of Sophie. She left the room, so the teacher could assign roles. Today, the teacher gave someone the role of annoying kid that would try to disrupt the lesson. That someone... was me! I was so excited about this. In high school I was always a well-behaved student, so finally I could be the bad student. I already had all these plans of pulling the hair of the girl next to me or flipping the table. This role was made for me. But... there was a restriction: if she would demand that I stop with confidence and authority, then I would need to stop. After all, this was still a class, meant to help her handle real classroom situations.

Sophie was called back in and she started her lesson. On the table next to me there was this pen case of my classmate. While Sophie was with her back to the table, I knocked it off the table. Sophie turns around, picks up the case and puts it back on the table. She is not phased at all and just continues with her lesson. She turns around and I quickly knock it off the table again. She says: Rico don't do that. I was like: that wasn't me, she did that. It was not a very convincing lie. She puts the case back on the table. This was not authoritative enough in my eyes, so I could continue. She turns around and I knock the case off the table for the third time. She turns to me and I look her in the eyes. And then... in her eyes... I see that she... breaks.

I cannot explain in words how you can see that in someone's eyes, but I did. A few seconds later, she starts crying and runs out of the classroom. The teacher goes after her, we are all in shock and are like what just happened? The teacher comes back after a while and tells us Sophie is not doing well, and the lesson is done for today.

There is this expression that I heard somewhere: The eyes are the window to the soul. Up until that day, I never really thought about that. After this day, I did. I have been surprised by what I see in eyes, time and again. For example, there was some research paper that claimed that if you have two strangers go through 36 question together, they fall in love afterwards. I was a little sceptic about that, so I tried this with a girl I was dating. What people often don't know, is that part of this experiment you have to look the other in the eyes for 4 minutes at the end. 4 minutes! That is long! The first minute is awkward and you try hard not to laugh. After that, it seems very connecting. To me, the 36 questions were interesting, but not what made me feel more connected to her. It was actually looking into her eyes that made me feel differently. Again, I cannot explain it in words, it is special. As a disclaimer, I didn't fall in love. We stopped dating after a few weeks. I still found it an interesting experience and I highly recommend trying this out if you have never done so.

Since that lesson with Sophie, I've started paying attention to people's eyes. Sometimes you see joy before someone smiles. Sometimes you see exhaustion that they're trying to hide. Sometimes you see love in their eyes. I still cannot fully explain it, but I have seen it enough times to believe there's something there. The eyes are the window to the soul. So, if you get the chance this week, really look someone in the eyes. You might be surprised by what you see.
